Attempting to rename clocked. (#3313)
modelica/ModelicaSpecification: chapters/synchronous.tex

  }\label{fig:clocked-variable}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Base- and Sub-Partitions}\label{base-clock-and-sub-clock-partitions}

There are two kinds of \firstuse[clock!partition]{clock partitions}:

> \begin{definition}[Base-partition]\index{base-partition}\index{clock!partition!base}

Reviewer: Reflect hyphenation in index:
```suggestion
\begin{definition}[Base-partition]\index{base-partition}\index{clock!partition!base-}
```

A base-partition identifies a set of equations and a set of variables which must be executed together in one task.

> Different base partitions can be associated to separate tasks for asynchronous execution.

Reviewer: Missing hyphen:
```suggestion
Different base-partitions can be associated to separate tasks for asynchronous execution.
```

\end{definition}

> \begin{definition}[Sub-partition]\index{sub-partition}\index{clock!partition!sub}

Reviewer: Reflect hyphenation in index:
```suggestion
\begin{definition}[Sub-partition]\index{sub-partition}\index{clock!partition!sub-}
```

> A sub-partition identifies a subset of equations and a subset of variables of a base-partition which are partially synchronized with other sub-partitions of the same base
> partition, i.e., synchronized when the ticks of the respective clocks are simultaneous.

Reviewer: Hyphenation and sentence-base line break:
```suggestion
A sub-partition identifies a subset of equations and a subset of variables of a base-partition which are partially synchronized with other sub-partitions of the same base-partition, i.e., synchronized when the ticks of the respective clocks are simultaneous.
```

\end{definition}

> The terminology for the partitions are as follows:

Reviewer: _terminology_ is singular:
```suggestion
The terminology for the partitions is as follows:
```

Author: Some claim that the plural can also be called "terminology"; but here it is a singular use.

\begin{itemize}

> \item \willintroduce{Clocked base-partitions}.
> \begin{itemize}
> \item \willintroduce{Discrete-time sub-partitions}.
> \item \willintroduce{Discretized sub-partitions}.
> \end{itemize}
> \item \willintroduce{Continuous-time base-partition}.

Reviewer: Indent for source code readability:
```suggestion
\item
  \willintroduce{Clocked base-partitions}.
  \begin{itemize}
  \item \willintroduce{Discrete-time sub-partitions}.
  \item \willintroduce{Discretized sub-partitions}.
  \end{itemize}
\item
  \willintroduce{Continuous-time base-partition}.
```

\end{itemize}
\begin{nonnormative}
Previously the discrete-time sub-partitions were called \emph{clocked discrete-time} (\emph{sub-clock} partition)\index{clocked discrete-time}\index{discrete-time!clocked}.

> And discretized sub-partitions were called \emph{discretized continuous-time} (\emph{sub-clock} partition)\index{discretized continuous-time}\index{continuous-time!discretized}.

Reviewer: Avoid beginning sentence with _and_:
```suggestion
Further, discretized sub-partitions were called \emph{discretized continuous-time} (\emph{sub-clock} partition)\index{discretized continuous-time}\index{continuous-time!discretized}.
```

> When emphasizing that the partitions are clock partitions sub-clock partition can still be referred to as \emph{sub-clock partitions}\index{sub-clock!partition}; and similarly for base-partition\index{base-clock!partition}.

Reviewer: Doesn't make sense unless removing the first _sub-_:
```suggestion
When emphasizing that the partitions are clock partitions, sub-partitions can still be referred to as \emph{sub-clock partitions}\index{sub-clock!partition}; and similarly for base-partition\index{base-clock!partition}.
```

Different base-partitions can be associated to separate tasks for asynchronous execution.
\end{definition}

\begin{definition}[Sub-partition]\index{sub-partition}\index{clock!partition!sub-}
A sub-partition identifies a subset of equations and a subset of variables of a base-partition which are partially synchronized with other sub-partitions of the same base-partition, i.e., synchronized when the ticks of the respective clocks are simultaneous.
\end{definition}

The terminology for the partitions is as follows:
\begin{itemize}
\item
  \willintroduce{Clocked base-partitions}.
  \begin{itemize}
  \item \willintroduce{Discrete-time sub-partitions}.
  \item \willintroduce{Discretized sub-partitions}.
  \end{itemize}
\item
  \willintroduce{Continuous-time base-partition}.
\end{itemize}
\begin{nonnormative}
Previously the discrete-time sub-partitions were called \emph{clocked discrete-time} (\emph{sub-clock} partition)\index{clocked discrete-time}\index{discrete-time!clocked}.
Further, discretized sub-partitions were called \emph{discretized continuous-time} (\emph{sub-clock} partition)\index{discretized continuous-time}\index{continuous-time!discretized}.

> When emphasizing that the partitions are clock partitions, sub-partitions can still be referred to as \emph{sub-clock partitions}\index{sub-clock!partition}; and similarly for base-partition\index{base-clock!partition}.

Author: Ok as before, but spell out difference between "clock" and "clocked" partition. Should have in definition.

\end{figure}

\subsection{Base- and Sub-Partitions}\label{base-clock-and-sub-clock-partitions}

There are two kinds of \firstuse[clock!partition]{clock partitions}:

\begin{definition}[Base-partition]\index{base-partition}\index{clock!partition!base-}
A base-partition identifies a set of equations and a set of variables which must be executed together in one task.
Different base-partitions can be associated to separate tasks for asynchronous execution.
\end{definition}

\begin{definition}[Sub-partition]\index{sub-partition}\index{clock!partition!sub-}
A sub-partition identifies a subset of equations and a subset of variables of a base-partition which are partially synchronized with other sub-partitions of the same base-partition, i.e., synchronized when the ticks of the respective clocks are simultaneous.
\end{definition}

The terminology for the partitions is as follows:
\begin{itemize}
\item
  \willintroduce{Clocked base-partitions}.
  \begin{itemize}
  \item \willintroduce{Discrete-time sub-partitions}.
  \item \willintroduce{Discretized sub-partitions}.
  \end{itemize}
\item
  \willintroduce{Continuous-time base-partition}.
\end{itemize}
\begin{nonnormative}

> Note that the term clock partition refer to these partitions in general, whereas clocked base-partition is a specific kind of partition.

Reviewer: Markup when speaking about terminology (and fix grammar):
```suggestion
Note that the term \emph{clock partition} refers to these partitions in general, whereas \emph{clocked base-partition} is a specific kind of partition.
```

partition, i.e., synchronized when the ticks of the respective clocks are simultaneous.
\end{definition}

The terminology for the partitions are as follows:
\begin{itemize}
\item \willintroduce{partition|clocked}[Clocked (base-clock) partitions].
\begin{itemize}
\item \willintroduce{partition|discrete-time}[Discrete-time (sub-clock) partitions].
\item \willintroduce{partition|discretized}[Discretized (sub-clock) partitions].
\end{itemize}

> \item \willintroduce{partition|continuous-time}[Continuous (base-clock) partition].

Reviewer 2: This is not the same as the continuous time partition that is not associated with any clocks, right?

My understanding (and it may be wrong) is that the partitions go as follows.

All equations and variables:
- Equations and variables not associated with any clock -> continuous-time partition (according to 16.7 and 16.7.3)
- Clocked equations and variables
  - Partitioned into which clock they are associated with -> base clock partitions
    - Discrete-time
    - Discretized
    - Subclock partitions
      - Discrete-time
      - Discretized
      
In case of the clocked partition both discrete and discretized are in terms of clocked variables. Any variable from the unclocked partition is treated as constant given by ``hold``. So, anything we are solving for would only be for clocked variables. And what determines whether it is discrete or discretized is the type of equations. Is that correct?

Maybe we should call equations and variables that are not associated with any clocks as "unclocked". Just to eliminate one use of "continuous". Also we call it as continuous-time partition in 16.7.3 but in 16.8.1 it says:
> If not explicitly stated otherwise, an expression with a variability such as continuous-time or discrete-time means that the expression is inside a partition that is not associated to a clock.
So it's not only continuous-time.

Author: > This is not the same as the continuous time partition that is not associated with any clocks, right?

It should be the normal continuous time partition.

> My understanding (and it may be wrong) is that the partitions go as follows.
> 
> All equations and variables:
> 
> * Equations and variables not associated with any clock -> continuous-time partition (according to 16.7 and 16.7.3)
> * Clocked equations and variables
>   
>   * Partitioned into which clock they are associated with -> base clock partitions
>     
>     * Discrete-time
>     * Discretized
>     * Subclock partitions
>       
>       * Discrete-time
>       * Discretized

I also thought something like that - but then I realized it is "simpler". The idea is instead that base-clock partitions are just "clocked" whereas sub-clock partitions can be discrete-time or discretized.

That allows a clocked base-clock partition to have a mix of discretized and discrete-time sub-clock partitions (even with different solverMethods).  That's why solverMethod can be inferred between sub-clock partitions (see Inferencing of solverMethod).

Unfortunately the specification doesn't make that straightforward, since the way to associate a solverMethod with a clock seems to associate it with a base-clock as well.

> In case of the clocked partition both discrete and discretized are in terms of clocked variables. Any variable from the unclocked partition is treated as constant given by `hold`. So, anything we are solving for would only be for clocked variables. And what determines whether it is discrete or discretized is the type of equations. Is that correct?
> 
> Maybe we should call equations and variables that are not associated with any clocks as "unclocked". Just to eliminate one use of "continuous". 

Hm... I guess that would make sense, and avoid the use of continuous-time. Will investigate after my vacation (if others agree) - possibly in a different PR.

> Also we call it as continuous-time partition in 16.7.3 but in 16.8.1 it says:
>
> > If not explicitly stated otherwise, an expression with a variability such as continuous-time or discrete-time means that the expression is inside a partition that is not associated to a clock.
> > So it's not only continuous-time.

Yes, "unclocked" would be better.

Reviewer: > > Also we call it as continuous-time partition in 16.7.3 but in 16.8.1 it says:
> > > If not explicitly stated otherwise, an expression with a variability such as continuous-time or discrete-time means that the expression is inside a partition that is not associated to a clock.
> > > So it's not only continuous-time.
> 
> Yes, "unclocked" would be better.

Agreed.  I was trying to think of alternative names that would sound less exceptional and more like a default, considering that we're talking about what I guess will remain the main mode of operation in Modelica.  I came to think of _clock-free partition_ and _asynchronous partition_, but I admit that both of these share some of the original problem with _unclocked_.

Author: However, that is a separate PR #3399

Each use of \lstinline!time! is conceptually included as a separate variable in this analysis, $\mathit{time}_i$ with $\text{\lstinline!der!}(\mathit{time}_{i}) = 1$.
\begin{nonnormative}
This means that \lstinline!time! can be used in different partitions without any restrictions.
Additionally, it means that every sub-partition directly referencing \lstinline!time! contains a call to \lstinline!der!.
\end{nonnormative}

\subsection{Base-Partitioning}\label{base-clock-partitioning}

> The goal is to identify all clocked equations and variables that should
> be executed together in the same task, as well as to identify the
> continuous-time partition.

Reviewer: It's called _continuous-time base partition_ now, right?
```suggestion
The goal is to identify all clocked equations and variables that should be executed together in the same task, as well as to identify the continuous-time base-partition.
```

Each use of \lstinline!time! is conceptually included as a separate variable in this analysis, $\mathit{time}_i$ with $\text{\lstinline!der!}(\mathit{time}_{i}) = 1$.
\begin{nonnormative}
This means that \lstinline!time! can be used in different partitions without any restrictions.
Additionally, it means that every sub-partition directly referencing \lstinline!time! contains a call to \lstinline!der!.
\end{nonnormative}

\subsection{Base-Partitioning}\label{base-clock-partitioning}

The goal is to identify all clocked equations and variables that should be executed together in the same task, as well as to identify the continuous-time base-partition.

> The base-partitioning is performed with base-clock inference which uses the following incidence definition:

Reviewer: Don't break the paragraph after this line, just break the line (can't make Github suggestion for that).

Author: Done

0 = f6(y, x1, u);
\end{lstlisting}

After base-partitioning, the following partitions are identified:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]

> // Base partition 1 -- clocked partition

Reviewer: We say _clock partition_ now, right?
```suggestion
// Base partition 1 -- clock partition
```

Reviewer: If not, I suppose we should say _clocked partition_ everywhere instead?

Author: I don't see the issue. The 1st Base partition is a "Clocked Partition"; instead of "Continuous-Time".

0 = f4(der(x2), x2, x1);         // incidence(e) = {x2, x1}
0 = f6(y, x1, u);                // incidence(e) = {y, x1, u}

// Identified as separate partition, but belonging to base-partition 2
0 = f5(der(x3), x3);             // incidence(e) = {x3}
\end{lstlisting}
\end{example}

\subsection{Sub-Partitioning}\label{sub-clock-partitioning}

> For each clocked base-partition B\textsubscript{i}, identified in
> \cref{base-clock-partitioning}, the sub-partitioning is performed with sub-clock inference
> which uses the following incidence definition:

Reviewer: Line breaks:
```suggestion
For each clocked base-partition B\textsubscript{i}, identified in \cref{base-clock-partitioning}, the sub-partitioning is performed with sub-clock inference which uses the following incidence definition:
```

\end{equation*}

\begin{example}
After sub-partitioning of the example from \cref{base-clock-partitioning}, the following partitions are identified:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]

> // Base partition 1 (clocked partition)

Reviewer: Same as above:
```suggestion
// Base partition 1 (clock partition)
```

Author: Same, I don't see the issue.

Reviewer 2: I agree with Hans.

have only a value at a clock tick. Therefore, such a partition is
handled in the same way as any other clocked partition. Especially,
operators such as \lstinline!sample!, \lstinline!hold!, \lstinline!subSample! must be used to communicate
signals of the discretized partition with other

> partitions. Hereby, a discretized partition is treated similarly as a

Reviewer: In the previous sentence, it sounds as if a discretized partition is a kind of clocked partition.  Here it sounds as if they are not.

Reviewer: There are a couple of more places as well in earlier paragraphs of this section that also need to be changed in order to avoid calling a discretized partition a clocked partition.

Author: That has now been resolved.

Reviewer: OK.  Let's start over from the new text.  Resolving.

clocked partition.

> \subsection{Clocked and Discretized Partition}\label{clocked-discrete-time-and-clocked-discretized-continuous-time-partition}\label{clocked-and-discretized-partition}

Reviewer: Wouldn't it read nicer in the plural, to make it not sound as something which is both at the same time?
```suggestion
\subsection{Clocked and Discretized Partitions}\label{clocked-discrete-time-and-clocked-discretized-continuous-time-partition}\label{clocked-and-discretized-partition}
```

Additionally to the variability of expressions defined in \cref{variability-of-expressions}, an orthogonal concept \willintroduce{clocked variability} is defined in this section.
If not explicitly stated otherwise, an expression with a variability such as \emph{continuous-time} or \emph{discrete-time} means that the expression is inside a partition that is not associated to a clock.
If an expression is present in a partition that is not a continuous-time partition, it is a \firstuse[clocked!expression]{clocked expression}\index{expression!clocked} and has \firstuse[clocked!variability]{clocked variability}\index{expression variability!clocked}.

> After sub-clock inferencing, see \cref{sub-clock-inferencing}, every partition that is associated to a clock has to be categorized as \willintroduce{clocked} or \willintroduce{discretized} partition.

Reviewer: Insert "a":
```suggestion
After sub-clock inferencing, see \cref{sub-clock-inferencing}, every partition that is associated to a clock has to be categorized as a \willintroduce{clocked} or a \willintroduce{discretized} partition.
```

Reviewer: (I see now that this was already there before.)

\begin{nonnormative}

> Previously clocked partition was refered to as clocked discrete-time partition, and discretized partition as clocked discretized continuous-time partition.

Reviewer: Use `\emph` on terminology mentioned just for historical reasons:
```suggestion
Previously clocked partition was refered to as \emph{clocked discrete-time partition}, and discretized partition as \emph{clocked discretized continuous-time partition}.
```

With the language elements defined in this section, continuous-time equations can be used in clocked partitions.
Hereby, the continuous-time equations are solved with the defined integration method between clock ticks.

> Such a partition is called a discretized partition, and the clock ticks are not interpreted as events, but as step-sizes of the integrator that the integrator must exactly hit.

Reviewer: Add to index:
```suggestion
Such a partition is called a \firstuse{discretized partition}\index{partition!discretized}, and the clock ticks are not interpreted as events, but as step-sizes of the integrator that the integrator must exactly hit.
```

Other kinds of partitions should be added to the index similarly.

Reviewer: In particular, I can't find any `\index{partition!continuous-time}`.

Author: That has now been added.

Reviewer: OK.  Resolving.

> Such a partition is called a \willintroduce{discretized partition}, and the clock ticks are not interpreted as events, but as step-sizes of the integrator that the integrator must exactly hit.

Reviewer 2: Since we are changing this, can we also change "must exactly hit":
```suggestion
Such a partition is called a \willintroduce{discretized partition}, and the clock ticks are not interpreted as events, but as step-sizes of the integrator that the integrator must hit exactly.
```

Hence, no event handling is triggered at clock ticks (provided an explicit event is not triggered from the model at this time instant).

\begin{nonnormative}
The interpretation of the clock ticks is the same assumption as for manually discretized controllers, such as the z-transform.
\end{nonnormative}

\begin{nonnormative}
It is not defined how to handle events that are triggered while solving a discretized partition.
For example, a tool could handle events in the same way as for a usual simulation -- but only check them at the time associated with clock-ticks.

Alternatively, relations might be interpreted literally, so that events are no longer triggered (in order that the time for an integration step is always the same, as needed for hard real-time requirements).
However, even if relations do not generate events, when-clauses and operators \lstinline!edge! and \lstinline!change! should behave as normal.
\end{nonnormative}

> From the view of other partitions, the discretized continuous-time variables have only a value at a clock tick (internally it may be more complicated, see \cref{solver-methods}).

Reviewer: Would read more naturally to me:
```suggestion
From the view of other partitions, the discretized continuous-time variables only have values at clock ticks (internally it may be more complicated, see \cref{solver-methods}).
```

> From the view of other partitions, the discretized continuous-time variables only have values at clock ticks (internally it may be more complicated, see \cref{solver-methods}).

Reviewer 2: It would be better with "point":
```suggestion
From the viewpoint of other partitions, the discretized continuous-time variables only have values at clock ticks (internally it may be more complicated, see \cref{solver-methods}).
```

> Therefore, outside the discretized partions themselves, they are treated as clocked partitions.

Reviewer: Avoid giving the impression that one is expected to implement discretized partitions by somehow mapping them to clocked partitions:
```suggestion
Therefore, outside the discretized partions themselves, they are treated similar to clocked partitions.
```

Author: to me it would make more sense with 'similarly'.

Author: Added that.

Especially, operators such as \lstinline!sample!, \lstinline!hold!, \lstinline!subSample! must be used to communicate signals of the discretized partition with other partitions.

\subsection{Clocked and Discretized Partitions}\label{clocked-discrete-time-and-clocked-discretized-continuous-time-partition}\label{clocked-and-discretized-partition}

Additionally to the variability of expressions defined in \cref{variability-of-expressions}, an orthogonal concept \willintroduce{clocked variability} is defined in this section.
If not explicitly stated otherwise, an expression with a variability such as \emph{continuous-time} or \emph{discrete-time} means that the expression is inside a partition that is not associated to a clock.
If an expression is present in a partition that is not a continuous-time partition, it is a \firstuse[clocked!expression]{clocked expression}\index{expression!clocked} and has \firstuse[clocked!variability]{clocked variability}\index{expression variability!clocked}.

> After sub-clock inferencing, see \cref{sub-clock-inferencing}, every partition that is associated to a clock has to be categorized as a \willintroduce{clocked} or a \willintroduce{discretized} partition.

Reviewer 2: Can we also changed from "associated to" to "associated with" while we are changing this anyways?
```suggestion
After sub-clock inferencing, see \cref{sub-clock-inferencing}, every partition that is associated with a clock has to be categorized as a \willintroduce{clocked} or a \willintroduce{discretized} partition.
```

\begin{nonnormative}
That is, a clocked partition is a standard sampled data system described by difference equations.
\end{nonnormative}

A discretized partition has to be solved with a \emph{solver method} of \cref{solver-methods}.
When \lstinline!previous(x)! is used on a continuous-time state variable \lstinline!x!, then \lstinline!previous(x)! uses the start value of \lstinline!x! as value for the first clock tick.

The use of the operator \lstinline!sample! from \cref{event-related-operators-with-function-syntax} in a discretized partition is problematic.
A diagnostic is recommended, especially if the operator is intended to generate events faster than the clock ticks, and otherwise the sampling should ideally be adjusted to the clock ticks.

\begin{nonnormative}
The reason for not disallowing \lstinline!sample! in a discretized partition is to make it possible to include \emph{any} continuous-time Modelica model in a sampled data control system.
Note that even if the sampling is slower than the clock ticks (or even the same rate) it still introduces the problem of possibly uneven sampling.
\end{nonnormative}

> In a clocked partition all event generating mechanisms do no longer apply.

Reviewer 2: "Do" is not needed:
```suggestion
In a clocked partition all event generating mechanisms no longer apply.
```

Therefore, outside the discretized partions themselves, they are treated similarly to discrete-time partitions.
Especially, operators such as \lstinline!sample!, \lstinline!hold!, \lstinline!subSample! must be used to communicate signals of the discretized partition with other partitions.

\subsection{Discrete-time and Discretized Partitions}\label{clocked-discrete-time-and-clocked-discretized-continuous-time-partition}\label{clocked-and-discretized-partition}

Additionally to the variability of expressions defined in \cref{variability-of-expressions}, an orthogonal concept \willintroduce{clocked variability} is defined in this section.
If not explicitly stated otherwise, an expression with a variability such as \emph{continuous-time} or \emph{discrete-time} means that the expression is inside a partition that is not associated to a clock.
If an expression is present in a partition that is not a continuous-time partition, it is a \firstuse[clocked!expression]{clocked expression}\index{expression!clocked} and has \firstuse[clocked!variability]{clocked variability}\index{expression variability!clocked}.

> After sub-clock inferencing, see \cref{sub-clock-inferencing}, every sub-clock partition that is associated with a clock has to be categorized as a \willintroduce{discrete-time} or a \willintroduce{discretized} partition.

Reviewer: To avoid misinterpreting _partition_ as base partition, it might be safer to remove (in order to avoid repeating the lengthy _sub-clock partition_):
```suggestion
After sub-clock inferencing, see \cref{sub-clock-inferencing}, every sub-clock partition that is associated with a clock has to be categorized as \willintroduce{discrete-time} or \willintroduce{discretized}.
```

\begin{nonnormative}

> Previously, discrete-time partition was refered to as \emph{clocked discrete-time partition}, and discretized partition as \emph{clocked discretized continuous-time partition}.

Reviewer: Write out fully:
```suggestion
Previously, discrete-time sub-clock partition was refered to as \emph{clocked discrete-time partition}, and discretized sub-clock partition as \emph{clocked discretized continuous-time partition}.
```

\end{nonnormative}

> If a sub-clock partition that is not continuous-time contains any of the operators \lstinline!der!, \lstinline!delay!, \lstinline!spatialDistribution!, or event related operators from \cref{event-related-operators-with-function-syntax} (with exception of \lstinline!noEvent! and \lstinline!smooth!), or contains a \lstinline!when!-clause with a \lstinline!Boolean! condition, it is a \firstuse[discretized!partition]{discretized}\index{partition!discretized} partition.

Reviewer: With the risk of mixing up the roles of base partitions and sub-clock partitions, it's better to be explicit here (also giving better symmetry with the next sentence):
```suggestion
If a sub-clock partition that is not continuous-time contains any of the operators \lstinline!der!, \lstinline!delay!, \lstinline!spatialDistribution!, or event related operators from \cref{event-related-operators-with-function-syntax} (with exception of \lstinline!noEvent! and \lstinline!smooth!), or contains a \lstinline!when!-clause with a \lstinline!Boolean! condition, it is a \firstuse[discretized!partition]{discretized}\index{partition!discretized} sub-clock partition.
```

However, even if relations do not generate events, when-clauses and operators \lstinline!edge! and \lstinline!change! should behave as normal.
\end{nonnormative}

From the view of other partitions, the continuous-time partition is discretized and the discretized continuous-time variables have only a value at a clock tick.

> Therefore, such a partition is externally treated as any other clocked partition.

Reviewer: This would be more clear to me (there is just a single continuous-time partition):
```suggestion
Therefore, outside the continuous-time partition itself, it is treated similar to clocked and discretized partitions.
```

Author: Good - **except for the next comment**. I have reformulated the entire section to be clearer.

Reviewer: OK.  Let's resolve this and look at the new section instead.

> Especially, operators such as \lstinline!sample!, \lstinline!hold!, \lstinline!subSample! must be used to communicate signals of the discretized partition with other partitions.

Reviewer: Has the focus now shifted from the continuous-time partition to discretized partitions? Was this paragraph about a discretized partition all along?

Author: Yes, that entire section was about "Clocked Discretized (Continuous-time) Partition" (see the following sub-sections). But for some reason "Clocked Discretized" was omitted in many places; and it was only described as continuous-time (since it is modelled as if continuous-time).

E.g., look at the following non-normative comment "It is not defined how to handle events that are triggered while solving the _continuous-time partition_. For example, a tool could handle events in the same way as for a usual simulation – but only check them at the time associated with clock-ticks."

That makes no sense for the normal continuous-time partition; where events should be handled normally and if taken literally it is not clear what clock-ticks they should be checked at.

The issue with "From the view of the continuous-time partition, the clock ticks are not interpreted as events, but as step-sizes of the integrator that the integrator must exactly hit." is similar, but subtler.

Author: @henrikt-ma is this clearer now?

Reviewer: Yes. Resolving.

\begin{nonnormative}
Previously, clocked partition was refered to as \emph{clocked discrete-time partition}, and discretized partition as \emph{clocked discretized continuous-time partition}.
\end{nonnormative}

If a partition that is not continuous-time contains any of the operators \lstinline!der!, \lstinline!delay!, \lstinline!spatialDistribution!, or event related operators from \cref{event-related-operators-with-function-syntax} (with exception of \lstinline!noEvent! and \lstinline!smooth!), or contains a \lstinline!when!-clause with a \lstinline!Boolean! condition, it is a \firstuse[discretized!partition]{discretized}\index{partition!discretized} partition.
Otherwise, it is a \firstuse[clocked!partition]{clocked}\index{partition!clocked} partition.

\begin{nonnormative}
That is, a clocked partition is a standard sampled data system described by difference equations.
\end{nonnormative}

A discretized partition has to be solved with a \emph{solver method} of \cref{solver-methods}.

> 

Author: Previously the paragraph discussed both clocked and discretized now it is only discretized so previous is unrelated.

> 

Reviewer: I don't see that anything has changed.  The sentence below used to be part of a paragraph about "clocked discretized continuous-time".

> 

Author: ok removing break

However, even if relations do not generate events, when-clauses and operators \lstinline!edge! and \lstinline!change! should behave as normal.
\end{nonnormative}

From the view of other partitions, the continuous-time partition is discretized and the discretized continuous-time variables have only a value at a clock tick.

> Therefore, such a partition is handled in the same way as any other clocked partition.

Reviewer: This is an old problem, but we should try to resolve it now: To me the second sentence here seems to say that "other clocked partitions are handled the same way as any other clocked partition".  I'm sure the intention is something more meaningful.

Author: Tried to clarify that it is the outside view that is identical.

Additionally to the variability of expressions defined in \cref{variability-of-expressions}, an orthogonal concept \willintroduce{clocked variability} is defined in this section.
If not explicitly stated otherwise, an expression with a variability such as \emph{continuous-time} or \emph{discrete-time} means that the expression is inside a partition that is not associated to a clock.
If an expression is present in a partition that is not a continuous-time partition, it is a \firstuse[clocked!expression]{clocked expression}\index{expression!clocked} and has \firstuse[clocked!variability]{clocked variability}\index{expression variability!clocked}.

After sub-clock inferencing, see \cref{sub-clock-inferencing}, every partition that is associated to a clock has to be categorized as a \willintroduce{clocked} or a \willintroduce{discretized} partition.
\begin{nonnormative}
Previously, clocked partition was refered to as \emph{clocked discrete-time partition}, and discretized partition as \emph{clocked discretized continuous-time partition}.
\end{nonnormative}

> If a partition that is not continuous-time contains no operator \lstinline!der!, \lstinline!delay!, \lstinline!spatialDistribution!, no event related operators from \cref{event-related-operators-with-function-syntax} (with exception of \lstinline!noEvent! and \lstinline!smooth!), and no \lstinline!when!-clause with a \lstinline!Boolean! condition, it is a \firstuse[clocked!partition]{clocked}\index{partition!clocked} partition.

Reviewer: Avoiding a negated condition would make it simpler:
```suggestion
If a partition that is not continuous-time contains any of the operators \lstinline!der!, \lstinline!delay!, \lstinline!spatialDistribution!, or event related operators from \cref{event-related-operators-with-function-syntax} (with exception of \lstinline!noEvent! and \lstinline!smooth!), or contains a \lstinline!when!-clause with a \lstinline!Boolean! condition, it is a \firstuse[discretized!partition]{discretized}\index{partition!discretized} partition.
Otherwise, it is a \firstuse[clocked!partition]{clocked}\index{partition!clocked} partition.

\begin{nonnormative}
That is, a clocked partition is a standard sampled data system described by difference equations.
\end{nonnormative}

A discretized partition has to be solved with a \emph{solver method} of \cref{solver-methods}.
```

Note that the suggestion replaces more text than I was able include in the comment's range of lines.

> With the language elements defined in this section, continuous-time equations can be used in clocked partitions.

Reviewer: Same as above:
```suggestion
With the language elements defined in this section, continuous-time equations can be used in clock partitions.
```

Author: Same, I don't see the issue.

Reviewer 2: I agree with Hans.

Hence, no event handling is triggered at clock ticks (provided an explicit event is not triggered from the model at this time instant).

\begin{nonnormative}
The interpretation of the clock ticks is the same assumption as for manually discretized controllers, such as the z-transform.
\end{nonnormative}

\begin{nonnormative}
It is not defined how to handle events that are triggered while solving a discretized sub-partition.
For example, a tool could handle events in the same way as for a usual simulation -- but only check them at the time associated with clock-ticks.

Alternatively, relations might be interpreted literally, so that events are no longer triggered (in order that the time for an integration step is always the same, as needed for hard real-time requirements).
However, even if relations do not generate events, when-clauses and operators \lstinline!edge! and \lstinline!change! should behave as normal.
\end{nonnormative}

From the viewpoint of other partitions, the discretized continuous-time variables only have values at clock ticks (internally it may be more complicated, see \cref{solver-methods}).

> Therefore, outside the discretized partions themselves, they are treated similarly to discrete-time partitions.

Reviewer: Fix typo and spell out:
```suggestion
Therefore, outside the discretized sub-partitions themselves, they are treated similarly to discrete-time partitions.
```

\end{nonnormative}

If a sub-partition that is not continuous-time contains any of the operators \lstinline!der!, \lstinline!delay!, \lstinline!spatialDistribution!, or event related operators from \cref{event-related-operators-with-function-syntax} (with exception of \lstinline!noEvent! and \lstinline!smooth!), or contains a \lstinline!when!-clause with a \lstinline!Boolean! condition, it is a \firstuse[discretized!sub-partition]{discretized}\index{sub-partition!discretized} sub-partition.
Otherwise, it is a \firstuse[discrete-time!sub-partition]{discrete-time}\index{sub-partition!discrete-time} sub-partition.

\begin{nonnormative}
That is, a discrete-time sub-partition is a standard sampled data system described by difference equations.
\end{nonnormative}

A discretized sub-partition has to be solved with a \emph{solver method} of \cref{solver-methods}.
When \lstinline!previous(x)! is used on a continuous-time state variable \lstinline!x!, then \lstinline!previous(x)! uses the start value of \lstinline!x! as value for the first clock tick.

> The use of the operator \lstinline!sample! from \cref{event-related-operators-with-function-syntax} in a discretized partition is problematic.

Reviewer: Spell out:
```suggestion
The use of the operator \lstinline!sample! from \cref{event-related-operators-with-function-syntax} in a discretized sub-partition is problematic.
```

A diagnostic is recommended, especially if the operator is intended to generate events faster than the clock ticks, and otherwise the sampling should ideally be adjusted to the clock ticks.

\begin{nonnormative}
The reason for not disallowing \lstinline!sample! in a discretized sub-partition is to make it possible to include \emph{any} continuous-time Modelica model in a sampled data control system.
Note that even if the sampling is slower than the clock ticks (or even the same rate) it still introduces the problem of possibly uneven sampling.
\end{nonnormative}

> In a discrete-time sub-partition all event generating mechanisms no longer apply.

Reviewer: Slightly off-topic, but _all … no longer_ doesn't sound right:
```suggestion
In a discrete-time sub-partition none of the event generating mechanisms apply anymore.
```

Reviewer: Or simpler:
```suggestion
In a discrete-time sub-partition none of the event generating mechanisms apply.
```

> Especially neither relations, nor any of the built-in operators of \cref{event-triggering-mathematical-functions} (event triggering mathematical functions) will trigger an event.

Reviewer: Another small, off-topic, language suggestion:
```suggestion
Especially neither relations, nor any of the built-in operators of \cref{event-triggering-mathematical-functions} (event triggering mathematical functions) will trigger events.
```

\end{nonnormative}

If the solver method is \lstinline!"External"!, then the sub-partition associated with this method is integrated by the simulation environment for an interval of length of \lstinline!interval()! using a solution method defined in the simulation environment.

\begin{nonnormative}
An example of such a solution method could be to have a table of the clocks that are associated with discretized sub-partitions and a method selection per clock.
In such a case, the solution method might be a variable step solver with step-size control that integrates between two clock ticks.
The simulation environment might also combine all partitions associated with method \lstinline!"External"!, as well as all continuous-time partitions, and integrate them together with the solver selected by the simulation environment.
\end{nonnormative}

If the solver method is \emph{not} \lstinline!"External"!, then the sub-partition is integrated using the given method with the step-size \lstinline!interval()!.

\begin{nonnormative}
For a periodic clock, the integration is thus performed with fixed step size.
\end{nonnormative}

> The solvers are defined with respect to the underlying ordinary differential equation in state space form to which the continuous-time sub-partition can be transformed, at least conceptually:

Reviewer 2: I don't like the use of "continuous-time sub-partition" here because we have not defined such a thing. I am guessing it is discretized sub-partition before it is discretized. But I do not know what would be a good term for it.

Author: Type it out: "discretized sub-partition before it is discretized"

Author: ```suggestion
The solvers are defined with respect to the underlying ordinary differential equation in state space form that corresponds to the sub-partition before it has been discretized, at least conceptually:
```

If a tool does not support the integration method defined in a model, typically a warning message is printed and the method is changed to \lstinline!"External"!.
\end{nonnormative}

> If the solver method is \lstinline!"External"!, then the sub-partition associated with this method is integrated by the simulation environment for an interval of length of
> \lstinline!interval()! using a solution method defined in the simulation environment.

Reviewer: Line break:
```suggestion
If the solver method is \lstinline!"External"!, then the sub-partition associated with this method is integrated by the simulation environment for an interval of length of \lstinline!interval()! using a solution method defined in the simulation environment.
```

\begin{nonnormative}
An example of such a solution method could be to have a table of the clocks that are associated with discretized partitions and a method selection per clock.
In such a case, the solution method might be a variable step solver with step-size control that integrates between two clock ticks.
The simulation environment might also combine all partitions associated with method \lstinline!"External"!, as well as all continuous-time partitions, and integrate them together with the solver selected by the simulation environment.
\end{nonnormative}

If the solver method is \emph{not} \lstinline!"External"!, then the sub-partition is integrated using the given method with the step-size \lstinline!interval()!.

\begin{nonnormative}
For a periodic clock, the integration is thus performed with fixed step size.
\end{nonnormative}

The solvers are defined with respect to the underlying ordinary
differential equation in state space form to which the continuous-time

> sub-partition can be transformed, at least conceptually ($t$ is time,

Reviewer: Still non-sentence-based line breaks here (and GitHub won't let me suggest a fix).

Author: This was corrected in a slightly more verbose way.
Hope it is ok.

Reviewer: Yes.  Resolving.

y &= g(x, u, t)
\end{align*}

> A solver method is applied to a sub-partition.

Author: ```suggestion
A discretized sub-partition shall be integrated with a solver method.
```
Perhaps like this?

Author: Different PR.

y &= g(x, u, t)
\end{align*}

> A solver method is applied to a sub-partition.

Author: Clean up afterwards.

> A solver method is applied to a sub-partition.

Author: #3465

This data is tool specific and is typically either defined with a vendor annotation or is given in the simulation environment.
\end{nonnormative}

> \subsection{Associating a Solver to a Sub-Partition}\label{associating-a-solver-to-a-partition}

Reviewer: I suppose it is fine to associate solvers also to discrete-time sub-partitions, even though they only apply to discretized ones?

A \lstinline!SolverMethod! can be associated to a clock with the overloaded \lstinline!Clock! constructor \lstinline!Clock($c$, solverMethod=$\ldots$)!, see \cref{clock-constructors}.

> If a clock is associated with a sub-clock of a clocked sub-partition and a \lstinline!SolverMethod! is associated with this clock, then the sub-partition is integrated with it.

Reviewer: Better say _discretized_?
```suggestion
If a clock is associated with a sub-clock of a discretized sub-partition and a \lstinline!SolverMethod! is associated with this clock, then the sub-partition is integrated with it.
```

  der(z) = subSample(x, 4) + 1 + subSample(y);
end IllegalInference;
\end{lstlisting}
Here \lstinline!z! is a continuous-time equation connected directly to both \lstinline!x! and \lstinline!y! sub-partitions that have different \lstinline!solverMethod!.
\end{example}

\section{Initialization of Clocked Partitions}\label{initialization-of-clocked-partitions}

The standard scheme for initialization of Modelica models does not apply for clocked base-partitions.
Instead, initialization is performed in the following way:
\begin{itemize}
\item

>   Variables in clocked partitions cannot be used in initial equation or
>   initial algorithm sections.

Reviewer: Line break:
```suggestion
  Variables in clocked partitions cannot be used in initial equation or initial algorithm sections.
```
